Information for glacialE.m (version 201912) calculating erosion depth based on 10Be and/or 26Al data
from sites with a known or assumed ice cover history. The calculator is fixed by Jakob Heyman
(jakob.heyman@gu.se) 2017-2019 with production rate (and other) calculations to a large degree based
on the CRONUS calculator (Balco et al. 2008) and the LSD production rate scaling (Lifton et al.
2014). This version of the calculator is a preliminary (but fully functioning) version and
additional calculation options will be added.


TO USE THE CALCULATOR:
1. Fix the input.txt file (see below).
2. Fix parameters in glacialE.m lines 15-73.
3. Run glacialE.m in Octave (might work in MATLAB).
4. Output (see below) is saved in out-glacialE.txt


The calculator is based on the CRONUS calculator (Balco et al. 2008) with modifications:
* Nuclide-specific LSD spallation and muon production rate scaling based on simulated cosmic ray
  fluxes (Lifton et al. 2014).
* Time-dependent spallation production rate with reference production rates based on global average
  from calibration studies published 2009-2019 calibrated using prodrate.m.
* Time-constant muon production rate parameterization (modified to reduce near-surface artifacts)
  based on Antarctica depth profile data (Borchers et al. 2016; Marrero et al. 2016; Phillips et al.
  2016; Balco 2017) with fstar and sigma0 calibrated using muclib.m.
* Adjustment of the time-dependent production rate to the year of sampling (assuming a constant
  production since 2010).
* Atmospheric pressure based on sample elevation and ERA-40 re-analysis dataset ('std'), Antarctica
  best-fit interpolation ('ant') (Balco et al. 2008), or given directly ('pre') in hPa.
* Attenuation length for calculating the spallation production rate adjustments for sample thickness
  and erosion rate interpolated from atmospheric pressure and cutoff rigidity (Marrero et al. 2016).
* The calculator calculates the production rate over time based on input data determining the local
  production rate, ice cover periods, and erosion history, and uses this to calculate the potential
  10Be and/or 26Al concentration in the sample. This calculation is done for all erosion values
  (mm/ka or cm per ice cover period) in Etestv and the best-fit erosion is interpolated from the
  simulated cosmogenic nuclide concentrations.
* The production rate is assumed to be zero through all ice cover periods.
* The calculator can calculate a glacial erosion rate (glacErate = 1) and/or glacial incremental
  depth steps (glacEstep = 1), assuming that all glacial erosion occurs at the deglaciation. If
  glacial erosion (glacE) is specified in the input (see below), the calculator will calculate the
  non-glacial erosion rate.
* The uncertainty (positive and negative) is estimated using Monte Carlo simulation. An internal
  uncertainty is calculated based on the cosmogenic nuclide concentration uncertainty. An external
  uncertainty is calucated based on uncertainties of the production rate, decay factor, and a range
  of optional parameters that can be specified in the input. The external uncertainty is calculated
  using the central point erosion and simulating the sample cosmogenic nuclide concentration. This
  concentration is then converted into erosion using the erosion and concentration calcualated using
  Etestv. This approach limits the calculations and saves time but it may affect the estimated
  uncertainty, in particular for uncertainties that may yield significant variations in the ice
  cover history. Given the major uncertainties with the erosion estimation approach (e.g. assuming
  that each glaciation erodes in a similar way), this simplification can be motivated. The internal
  and external uncertainties are combined and reported as one positive and one negative uncertainty.
* For glacial erosion calculations, a maximum erosion value is estimated based on the depth of
  erosion that yield cosmogenic nuclide inheritance equal to 1% of the surface concentration
  expected from the last post-glacial exposure period.
* For samples with measured 10Be and 26Al concentrations, the calculator can calculate combined
  erosion (nucl1026 = 1) values and uncertainties (subfunction Ecalc1026). This is only done for
  samples for which nuclide-specific erosion values overlap within uncertainties.


INPUT INSTRUCTIONS:
The input is given in the file input.txt. The data for each sample is specified in one row (rows can
be commented out with '%'). Row 1 specifies the data of each columns. The following specifiers are
allowed (the order of the data/columns is irrelevant):
sample - Sample name - (strange characters may cause problems).
lat - Latitude [DD (WGS84)] - North latitudes are positive. South latitudes are negative.
long - Longitude [DD (WGS84)] - East longitudes are positive. West longitudes are negative.
elv - Elevation/pressure [m a.s.l. / hPa].
Pflag - Elevation/pressure flag - std/ant/pre (see above). If not specified std will be used.
thick - Sample thickness [cm].
dens - Sample density [g/cm3].
densunc - Sample density uncertainty [g/cm3] - used for erosion uncertainty estimation.
shield - Correction factor - Unitless factor used for topo/geom shielding correction.
erosion - Non-glacial erosion rate [mm/ka]. If not specified a zero erosion rate is assumed.
erosionunc - Erosion rate uncertainty [mm/ka] - used for erosion uncertainty estimation.
N10 - 10Be concentration [atoms/g].
N10unc - 10Be concentration uncertainty [atoms/g].
std10 - 10Be standardization - See make_consts_expage.m lines 34-38 for acceptable names and values.
N26 - 26Al concentration [atoms/g].
N26unc - 26Al concentration uncertainty [atoms/g].
std26 - 26Al standardization - See make_consts_expage.m lines 41-42 for acceptable names and values.
samplingyr - Sampling year [CE].
pressure - Atmospheric pressure [hPa] - If pressure is included, data in elv is not used.
icevalue - Break value for determination of ice cover period. Periods with a value in iceproxy (see
           below) that is higher than or equal to the icevalue will be ice covered.
icevalueunc - Uncertainty for the icevalue break value.
deglac - Age of last deglaciation [yr] - used to adjust ice cover history.
deglacunc - Uncertainty for the age of last glaciation [yr] - for erosion uncertainty estimation.
glacE - Glacial erosion rate or incremental depth [mm/ka or cm/glac] - If included (and erosion is
        not included in the input), the non-glacial erosion rate is calculated.
glacEunc - Glacial erosion rate or incremental depth uncertainty [mm/ka or cm/glac].
burialdepth - Burial depth [cm] of the sample. Sample density is used for overlying material.
isostP - String specifying the isostatic adjustment method for atmospheric pressure adjustments.
isostsubm - String specifying the isostatic adjustment method for submergence adjustments.
isostsubmunc - Uncertainty [ratio, 0.1 = 10%] for the isostatic submergence adjustment.
For isostP and iostsubm the following strings can be used:
ICE6G - Isostatic adjustment using the global ICE6G data (Argus et al. 2014; Peltier et al. 2015).
ANU2017 - Isostatic adjustment using the data from Lambeck et al. (2017) for North America.
PD2015 - Isostatic adjustment using the Påsse and Daniels (2015) data for Fennoscandia.
filename - Name of file with isostatic adjustment data (tv, delv or shoreline, and yr0).
If a sample has the string '-' for isostP or isostsubm, no isostatic adjustment is carried out.


glacialE.m SETTINGS:
In lines 15-73 there are a range of parameters and settings that controls the simulation. Here are
some brief explanations for these settings.
mt - Max time (years before sampling) for the start of the erosion simulation.
glacErate - Calculate erosion using a glacial erosion rate?
glacEstep - Calculate erosion using incremental erosion depth at the end of each ice cover period?
mc - Monte Carlo iterations for uncertainty estimation.
nucl1026 - Calculate erosion for combined 10Be + 26Al data?
plch - Choices and parameters for plotting.
tdv - Vector specifying time points (years before sampling) for which the sample depth and
      uncertainty is estimated and included in output. Time points older than mt are not included.

Fixed parameters for specific time period(s): fixE (lines 51-57)
    Here specific values can be set for specific time periods for the non-glacial erosion and
    glacial erosion. The values set here overrides the values set in input or the values to find.
    Various values for various time periods can be set by using multiple rows in the corresponding
    time vectors (tv) and parameters. For the glacial erosion parameters, both fixed glacial erosion
    rates and glacial erosion incremental steps can be set and these are independent of glacErate
    and glacEstep set above.
Fixed ice-cover and icefree for specific time period(s): fixice (lines 61-63)
    Here specific periods with ice cover (fixice.ice) and ice-free periods (fixice.noice) can be set
    that overrides the ice cover periods and ice-free periods determined by the LR04 values and the
    optional input deglaciation age.

iceproxy - Name of file with ice value parameters for determination of ice cover period. The default
           data is the LR04 stack of d18O (Lisiecki and Raymo 2005). Other data can be used and the
           should then be organized in a file with two columns of data where column 1 is a time
           vector and column 2 is the iceproxy data.
iceproxy_startyr - Start year (yr 0) of the iceproxy data.

Etestv - Vector with erosion values (mm/ka or cm per ice cover period) used to interpolate the best-
         fit erosion yielding the measured cosmogenic nuclide concentration.


OUTPUT INFORMATION:
The calculator can plot various data plus saves an output file out-glacialE.txt.
The output contains the erosion rate/step plus positive and negative uncertainty plus the full
erosion depth (including glacial and non-glacial erosion) at the time points specified in tdv
(if <= mt). The maximum glacial erosion (see above) is reported as the central value erosion for
samples indicating deeper erosion. For samples where the central value and positive uncertainty
surpass the maximum erosion, the positive uncertainty is set to the maximum value of Etestv. Samples
with 0 concentration yield '-' in the output.
If all input 10Be concentration/uncertainty are 0/0 no 10Be erosion data will be saved.
If all input 26Al concentration/uncertainty are 0/0 no 26Al erosion data will be saved.
